





































Abstract Algebra

Hechen Hu


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Groups
Semigroups, Monoids and Groups

	A semigroup is a nonempty set  together with a binary operation on  which is associative.


	A monoid is a semigroup  which contains a (two-sided) identity element  such that  for all .


	A group is a monoid  such that there exists a (two-sided) inverse element and the operation between the inverse element and the original element yields the identity element regardless of order of operation.


	A semigroup  is said to be abelian or commutative if its binary operation is commutative.


	The order of a group  is the cardinal number .  is said to be finite(resp. infinite) if  is finite(resp. infinite).


	If  is a monoid, then the identity element  is unique. If  is a group, then
	
		 and ;
		for all  we have  and  (left and right cancellation);
		for each element in  its inverse element is unique;
		for each element in  the inverse of its inverse is itself;
		for  we have ;
		for  the equation  and  have unique solutions in  and .
	


	Let  be a semigroup.  is a group iff the following conditions hold:
	
		there exists an element  such that  for all  (left identity element);
		for each , there exists an element  such that  (left inverse).
	
and an analogous result holds for "right inverses" and a "right identity".



	Let  be a semigroup.  is a group iff for all  the equations  and  have solutions in .


	



	Let  be a nonempty set and  the set of all bijections . Under the operation of composition of functions, ,  is a group. The elements of  are called permutations and  is called the group of permutations on the set . If , then  is called the symmetric group on  letters and denoted . .


	The direct product of two groups  and  with identities  and  is the group whose underlying set is  and whose binary operation is given by:
	


	 is abelian if both  and  are;  is the identity and  is the inverse of . Clearly .



	Let  be an equivalence relation on a monoid  such that  and  imply  for all . Then the set  of all equivalence classes of  under  is a monoid under the binary operation defined by , where  denoted the equivalence class of . If  is an [abelian] group, then so is .
	An equivalence relation on a monoid  that satisfies these hypothesis is called a congruence relation on .
	


	The following relation on the additive froup  is a congruence relation:
	


	The set of equivalence classes (denoted ) is an infinite abelian group, with addition given by , and called the group of rationals modulo one.


	The meaningful product on any sequence of elements of a semigroup , , (in this order), is defined inductively as below: If , the only meaningful product is . If , then a meaningful product is defined to be any product of the form  where  and  and  are meaningful products of  and  elements respectively.


	The standard  product  is defined as follows:
	




[Generalized Associative Law]
	If  is a semigroup and , then any two meaningful products of  in this order are equal.

[Generalized Commutative Law]
	If  is a commutative semigroup and , then for any permutation  of , .


	Let  be a semigroup,  and . The element  is defined to be the standard  product  with  for . If  is a monoid,  is defined to be the identity element . If  is a group, then for each ,  is defined to be .


	If  is a group(resp. semigroup, monoid) and , then for all  (resp.  and ) :
	
		 
		
	






Homomorphisms and Subgroups

	Let  and  be semigroups. A function  is a homomorphism provided
	


	If  is injective as a map of sets,  is said to be a monomorphism. If  is surjective,  is called an epimorphism. If  is bijective,  is called an isomorphism. In this case  and  are said to be isomorphic (written ). A homomorphism  is called an endomorphism of  and an isomorphism  is called an automorphism of .


	Let  be a homomorphism of groups. The kernel of (denoted ) is . If  is a subset of , then   is the image of .  is called the image of  and denoted . If  is a subset of ,  is the inverse image of .


	Let  be a homomorphism of groups. Then
	
		 is a monomorphism iff .
		 is an isomorphism iff there is a homomorphism  such that  and .
	


	Let  be a semigroup and  a nonempty subset of it. If for every  we have , we say that  is closed under the product in . This is the same as saying that the binary operation on , when restricted to , is a binary operation on .


	Let  be a group and  a nonempty subset that is closed under the product in . If  is itself a group under the product in , then  is said to be a subgroup of , denoted .


	If a subgroup  is not  itself or the trivial subgroup, which consists only of the identity element, is called a proper subgroup.


	Let  be a nonempty subset of a group . Then  is a subgroup of  iff  for all .


	If  is a group and  is a nonempty family of subgroups, then  is a subgroup of .


	



	Let  be a group and  a subset of . Let  be the family of all subgroups of  which contain . Then  is called the subgroup of  generated by the set  and denoted . The elements of  are the generators of . If ,  is said to be finitely generated. If , the subgroup  is called the cyclic (sub)group generated by .



	If  is a group and  a nonempty subset of , then the subgroup  generated by  consists of all finite products . In particular for every , .


	


	The subgroup  generated by the set  is called the subgroup generated by the groups . If  and  are subgroups, the subgroup  generated by  and  is called the join of  and  and is denoted .




Cyclic Groups
Cosets and Counting
Normality, Quotient Groups, and Homomorphisms
Symmetric, Alternating, and Dihedral Groups
Categories: Products, Coproducts, and Free Objects
Direct Products and Direct Sums
Free Groups, Free Products, Generators and Relations


The Structure of Groups
Free Abelian Groups
Finitely Generated Abelian Groups
The Krull-Schmidt Theorem
The Action of a Group on a Set
The Sylow Theorem
Classification of Finite Groups
Nilpotent and Solvable Groups
Normal and Subnormal Series


Rings
Rings and Homomorphisms
Ideals
Factorization in Commutative Rings
Rings of Quotients and Localization
Rings of Polynomials and Formal Power Series
Factorization in Polynomial Rings

Modules
Modules, Homomorphisms and Exact Sequences
Free Modules and Vector Spaces
Projective and Injective Modules
Hom and Duality
Tensor Products
Modules over a Principal Ideal Domain
Algebras


Fields and Galois Theory
Field Extensions
The Fundamental Theorem
Splitting Fields, Algebraic Closure and Normality
The Galois Group of a Polynomial
Finite Fields
Separability
Cyclic Extensions
Cyclotomic Extensions
Radical Extensions


The Structure of Fields
Transcendence Bases
Linear Disjointness and Separability

Commutative Rings and Modules
Chain Conditions
Prime and Primary Ideals
Primary Decomposition
Noetherian Rings and Modules
Ring Extensions
Dedekind Domains
The Hilbert Nullstellensatz


The Structure of Rings
Simple and Primitive Rings
The Jacobson Radical
Semisimple Rings
The Prime Radical; Prime and Semiprime Rings
Algebras
Division Algebras


Categories
Functors and Natural Transformations
Adjoint Functors
Morphisms
	
	
	
	
